README.md, before:

# The LLVM Compiler Infrastructure

Welcome to the LLVM project!

This repository contains the source code for LLVM, a toolkit for the
construction of highly optimized compilers, optimizers, and run-time
environments.

The LLVM project has multiple components. The core of the project is
itself called "LLVM". This contains all of the tools, libraries, and header
files needed to process intermediate representations and convert them into
object files. Tools include an assembler, disassembler, bitcode analyzer, and
bitcode optimizer.

C-like languages use the [Clang](http://clang.llvm.org/) frontend. This
component compiles C, C++, Objective-C, and Objective-C++ code into LLVM bitcode
-- and from there into object files, using LLVM.

Other components include:
the [libc++ C++ standard library](https://libcxx.llvm.org),
the [LLD linker](https://lld.llvm.org), and more.

## Getting the Source Code and Building LLVM

Consult the
[Getting Started with LLVM](https://llvm.org/docs/GettingStarted.html#getting-the-source-code-and-building-llvm)
page for information on building and running LLVM.

For information on how to contribute to the LLVM project, please take a look at
the [Contributing to LLVM](https://llvm.org/docs/Contributing.html) guide.

## Getting in touch

Join the [LLVM Discourse forums](https://discourse.llvm.org/), [Discord
chat](https://discord.gg/xS7Z362), or #llvm IRC channel on
[OFTC](https://oftc.net/).

The LLVM project has adopted a [code of conduct](https://llvm.org/docs/CodeOfConduct.html) for
participants to all modes of communication within the project.

Commit message:

Adding Intel(R) Quantum Intrinsics and header files for FLEQ and Quantum Operations

README.md, after:

# Intel (R) Quantum Intrinsics

This repository builds C++ based frontend for the Intel Quantum Compiler.  It is used in conjunction with the [Intel Quantum Passes](https://github.com/intel/quantum-passes).  It adapts the clang and LLVM compiler to use Quantum Intrinsics, and includes several header files with specific quantum libraries and functions.

## Building the Tools
Building the compiler is very similar to standard LLVM, and requires the same software, found [here](https://llvm.org/docs/GettingStarted.html#software).

After ensuring the system requirements are met, use the following commands:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -G Ninja -S ../llvm -B . -DLLVM_INSTALL_UTILS=ON -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=<iqc_install_dir> -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="clang;lld" -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
ninja -C . install
```

`<iqc_install_dir>` is the location where you want IQC to be installed.  If it is not specified, it will attempt to be installed to `/usr/bin`.  If you do not want to install the compiler anywhere, simply use the command `ninja -C .` instead.

## Information for Developers
Much of the information that's helpful to use and develop with LLVM is helpful for our compiler as well, but this is some frequently useful advice.

### Debugging
In order to to get full debug information and assertions, pass the `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug` rather than `Release`.

In order to get "print debugging" for LLVM classes through the `.dump()` method, include `-DLLVM_ENABLE_DUMP=On` to the cmake invocation.

### Intrinsics
If you find you need to generate your own intrinsics, the TableGen files for these can be found in `llvm/include/llvm/IR/IntrinsicsQuantum.td`.

### Header File and Quantum Library
If you find you need to add to the library of quantum functions, they can be found in `clang/include/Quantum`.  The same conventions can be used, mainly the use of the `noinline` and the `.qbbs_text` attributes.  These attributes ensure that the functions are not improperly inlined, which can cause problems later on in the compilation process.
