clang-tools-extra/docs/ModularizeUsage.rst, before:

================
modularize Usage
================

``modularize [<modularize-options>] <include-files-list> [<front-end-options>...]``

``<modularize-options>`` is a place-holder for options
specific to modularize, which are described below in
`Modularize Command Line Options`.

``<include-files-list>`` specifies the path of a file name for a
file containing the newline-separated list of headers to check
with respect to each other. Lines beginning with '#' and empty
lines are ignored. Header file names followed by a colon and
other space-separated file names will include those extra files
as dependencies. The file names can be relative or full paths,
but must be on the same line. For example::

  header1.h
  header2.h
  header3.h: header1.h header2.h

Note that unless a "-prefix (header path)" option is specified,
non-absolute file paths in the header list file will be relative
to the header list file directory.  Use -prefix to specify a different
directory.

``<front-end-options>`` is a place-holder for regular Clang
front-end arguments, which must follow the <include-files-list>.
Note that by default, the underlying Clang front end assumes .h files
contain C source, so you might need to specify the ``-x c++`` Clang option
to tell Clang that the header contains C++ definitions.

Modularize Command Line Options
===============================

.. option:: -prefix <header-path>

  Prepend the given path to non-absolute file paths in the header list file.
  By default, headers are assumed to be relative to the header list file
  directory.  Use -prefix to specify a different directory.

Commit message:

Added module map generation docs and some clean-up.
llvm-svn: 192792

clang-tools-extra/docs/ModularizeUsage.rst, after:

================
Modularize Usage
================

``modularize [<modularize-options>] <include-files-list> [<front-end-options>...]``

``<modularize-options>`` is a place-holder for options
specific to modularize, which are described below in
`Modularize Command Line Options`.

``<include-files-list>`` specifies the path of a file name for a
file containing the newline-separated list of headers to check
with respect to each other. Lines beginning with '#' and empty
lines are ignored. Header file names followed by a colon and
other space-separated file names will include those extra files
as dependencies. The file names can be relative or full paths,
but must be on the same line. For example::

  header1.h
  header2.h
  header3.h: header1.h header2.h

Note that unless a ``-prefix (header path)`` option is specified,
non-absolute file paths in the header list file will be relative
to the header list file directory.  Use -prefix to specify a different
directory.

``<front-end-options>`` is a place-holder for regular Clang
front-end arguments, which must follow the <include-files-list>.
Note that by default, the underlying Clang front end assumes .h files
contain C source, so you might need to specify the ``-x c++`` Clang option
to tell Clang that the header contains C++ definitions.

Modularize Command Line Options
===============================

.. option:: -prefix <header-path>

  Prepend the given path to non-absolute file paths in the header list file.
  By default, headers are assumed to be relative to the header list file
  directory.  Use ``-prefix`` to specify a different directory.

.. option:: -module-map-path=<module-map-path>

  Generate a module map and output it to the given file.  See the description
  in :ref:`module-map-generation`.

.. option:: -root-module=<root-name>

  Put modules generated by the -module-map-path option in an enclosing
  module with the given name.  See the description in :ref:`module-map-generation`.
